hello I'm Tanya Becket welcome to the
program International criticism of
Israel is mounting over the deaths of
more than 100 Palestinians Desperately
Seeking aid from a rare Convoy in Gaza
City Israel admits its soldiers had
opened fire saying they were concerned
about security but that most of the
deaths happened in an ensuing Crush some
Palestinians say Israeli troops fired
directly at them France said that firing
on civilians trying to access food is
unjustifiable the UN Secretary General
Antonio guttera said he was shocked to
learn that a 100 people have been killed
he's called for an independent
investigation to identify those
responsible President Biden called the
incident tragic and alarming he also
expressed concern that efforts to broker
a temporary ceasefire between Israel and
Hamas may now be in Jeopardy live now to
Jerusalem and our Middle East
correspondent yoland Nell yoland what
more can you tell us about what happened
around this Aid
[Music]
Convoy well despite the very different
accounts we're getting from the Israelis
and Palestinians some facts are clear
thousands of people had turned out um
they've been waiting for several hours
overnight um in Gaza City on this
Coastal Road this is after a period
where the UN said there were about 3
weeks when no International Aid was
arriving into the north of the Gaza
Strip we were told by witnesses that
people had come from from different
parts of the north hoping to get a sack
flower to take home uh for their family
and they' sat waiting for hours there
were then these very chaotic scenes uh
when a convoy of some 30 lorries arrived
it was being run by private contractors
with the Israeli military overseeing the
operation and there's an Israeli
checkpoint uh just to the South here now
what the Palestinian Witnesses say what
Palestinian Health officials say is that
they saw uh soldiers opening fire and
people um suffered gunshot wounds
particular to their upper bodies that
there were also people who were run over
by the aid lorries in the chaotic scenes
then uh you have the Israeli military
saying that actually most of those
killed uh were killed in a stampede um
that there were attempts to loot the aid
uh from the lorries and and that people
then were caught up in a crush some
people were being run over by the
lorries they say that then uh soldiers
did fire some warning shots to try to
drive back the crowd uh with indications
that people were getting too close to an
Israeli military position and youan
because of the very sensitive uh
perception of Aid getting into the Gaza
Strip and how that plays into the
negotiations currently the concern is
that it will simply derail
them indeed and that's what one Hamas
official has said that there is a risk
of that uh these Talks Of course taking
place in Qatar at the moment with an
Israeli delegation and a Hamas
delegation there and what has been
proposed we understand is a 6 week truce
um during that time you would have uh
some 40 Israeli hostages released for
about 10 times as many Palestinian
prisoners in Israeli jails and a big
surge in the amount of Aid uh going into
Gaza now President Biden when he was
asked about this by journalists did
acknowledge um that yesterday's incident
could really complicate those talks and
we understand from the White House that
he spoke uh to the cateres to the
Egyptians who are acting as mediators
here uh to try to get an update on
what's going on with those negotiations